---
layout: post
title: Everyone needs a FizzBuzz
---

**So here's mine**

*I'm sure someone has already thought of this but, I'm too lazy to search around and see.*

## Almost FizzBuzz
I'm going to view the output of a fizzbuzz implementation as a list. Observation: once you know the position of the Fizzes, Buzzes and FizzBuzzes in the first 15 items in the list you know it the entire list. So for example Fizz occurs at 3, but also at 18, 33, 48, ... 99. So if we create a fizzbuzz list of length 15, we can create a list of length 30 just by appending the list to itself. In a lazy language like haskell we may as well create an inifinite list since it doesn't cost us anything until we take the the finite list of the size we want, 100.
{% highlight haskell %}
almostFizzbuzz n = take n . cycle $ fb <$> [1..15]
  where
    fb n
      | n == 15        = "FizzBuzz"
      | n `mod` 3 == 0 = "Fizz"
      | n `mod` 5 == 0 = "Buzz"
      | otherwise      = show n

{% endhighlight %}
What's I like about this is that since we know that the only number that requires yields a FizzBuzz in the first 15 is 15 itself. We only need to call the modulo operator 14 times! This almost works but there is one problem, the numbers in the list are wrong after position 15, they just repeat themselves. So ```almostFizzbuzz 100``` begins:
{% highlight haskell %}
[ "1","2","Fizz","4","Buzz","Fizz","7","8","Fizz","Buzz","11"
, "Fizz","13","14","FizzBuzz", "1","2","Fizz","4", ...
]
{% endhighlight %}
We're close, but not quite there.

## FizzBuzz
The solution is straightforward, instead of creating an infinite list of strings, we create an infinite list of functions with integer arguments that are constant on all of the Fizzes, Buzzes, and FizzBuzzes and shows the integer elsewhere. Then we simply apply these functions to a list of all integers starting at 1.
{% highlight haskell %}

fizzbuzz n = take n $ zipWith ($) int2fb [1..]
  where
    int2fb = cycle $ fb <$> [1..15]
    fb n
      | n == 15        = const "FizzBuzz"
      | n `mod` 3 == 0 = const "Fizz"
      | n `mod` 5 == 0 = const "Buzz"
      | otherwise      = show
{% endhighlight %}
Still only 14 calls to ```mod```, yay!
